---
title: Wandering Mind
date: 2020-01-07
draft: false
tags: ["book"]
---

Sometimes I carry on my daily routines carelessly, and other times I ruminate too much, either about some embarrassing moments in the past or imaginative stories in the future.
Too often I found noticeable amount of time passed and had to exert mental efforts to pull myself back to reality.
I also suffer mild form of procrastination, putting off preparing tax return documents being one of them.
It turns out that these rumination and procrastination are all dictated, not surprisingly, by our very own minds.
There exist two systems in our mind systems: system 1 and system 2.
System 1 represents our lazy subconscious mind that aims to build reusable patterns from our past experiences and use them to our daily lives whenever applicable;
On the other hand, system 2 is our smart, reflective and conscious mind that helps us make rational decisions whenever the situations require so.
Unfortunately, system 2 bandwidth is limited and can be easily depleted.
Driving is a typical example of system 1 at work in which not much mental efforts are required, at least for experienced drivers, to prevent us going astray.
Our lives would be a lot harder if routine activities like driving needs full attention from system 2.
Learning something new requires our mind switching into control of system 2, otherwise, staring at pages for an hour without thinking does no good.
The interaction between the two systems determine how we live our lives every day.
Too much system 1 at work put us into auto-pilot mode, wandering around aimlessly; too much system 2 causes mental burn-out.

Recognizing the two systems in our minds is not enough to solve our problems.
The book *A Liberated Mind* provides some useful tools that make sense to me.

## Thought is just thought, nothing else

I recently notice a stark difference between my daughter, who is older, and my toddler son.
My son tends to do everything we tell him to do, that is, as long as he can manage to make sense of the sentence, like putting away the toys he just played.
On the other hand, my daughter will inject an arguing process between understanding and doing, which usually means refusing to do things she isn't excited about, like eating more vegetables.
As we grow older, we clearly get better at differentiating external messages from orders and happily exercise our free wills.
However, we seem to be rather incapable of separating our internal messages generated by  system 1 from our actions, for which real-life examples abound.

After a day of work, we can too easily give up exercising because our minds tell us to just relax and enjoy something more fun to do, like sitting on the couch watching TV shows.
Or we hear this sound of "it's still too early, just sleep another ten minutes" when we try to get up in the morning, knowing that each extra minute in the morning means more work done and less time stuck in the traffic.
We actually have numerous moments like this every single day.

The author names this technique as the *defusion pivot*, which essentially says that thought is just thought and we have the choice to be not dictated by it.
Just like my daughter, whenever we receive a self-message, we should raise our awareness that it's just another story that our subconscious mind tells us.
I find this particularly useful as I try to apply it to stop negative rumination.
Sometimes simply recognizing rumination as a thought gives us powerful motivation to break out of it.

## Real self deprived from everything else

Having two kids at home, I find it amazing that our human kids can grow from a state of merely eating and sleeping throughout the day to a stage of continuously demanding more and more, physical or mental possessions.
When we were born, we were in a state of emptiness -- we probably didn't worry too much about how to get the next meal, neither did we care social approval.
We accumulate experiences as we grow up and gradually build our mental representation of ourselves and the world, which is probably where the system 1 emerges in the first place.
The problem is, we're going to suffer if we let our experiences define us.

Uncovering our true selves sounds daunting but is necessary to liberate ourselves from our minds.
I am not clear at this moment how to do this, but it seems keeping an open mind is one of the key components to its success.
For example, when we try to interpret something, it's important to remind ourselves that it's just one way of looking at it, which is very much determined by our limited experiences.

## Accept pains to uncover values

To this date I still vividly remember the embarrassing moment in middle school, which was about twenty years ago (a long time, yes, I know), when I was caught speaking with another student when everyone was supposed to study quietly.
This cringing moment keeps flashing back on me and I've tried various ways to shun it off, to no avail.
It's until I read this book that I realize my very behavior is centered around avoiding or denying that experience, which couldn't be more wrong!
The author argues that from pains we uncover values, which shines a light on my long-lasting problem.
The reason that I am being haunted by embarrassing memory is that I try to maintain a high standard on myself, even from a young age.
In other words, my self-esteem is too high to accept that mistake, which constantly magnifies every minor misstep I have.
Also the spotlight effect might be a cahoot during the process.
After all, I am probably the only one who still remembers those embarrassing moments, most people didn't even pay any attention to them.

The way out of pain is simple -- try to live with it.
Embrace it, really feel it, give it a name if you feel like so.
Seize the opportunity to look at it when it appears.
Painful experience will lose its power if we examine it close enough.

## Live in the present

Now we are fully aware that thoughts are just thoughts and there exist transcendent selves within us, we've also bravely lived with our negative experiences, what's next?
The author recommends a fourth pivot called 'presence', which is in accord with what many mindfulness practices try to achieve.
We spend too much time ruminating the past and imagining the future, neither of them could be under our control.
It is in those missed moments that we forget the most precious thing in our lives -- the present.
If I set a goal to get up at 6am in the morning but surrendered to my evil procrastination and didn't get up until 7:30am.
The best strategy then is not berating myself for the missed one and half hour, but fully appreciating the current moment when I can enjoy a healthy breakfast and plan for the rest of the day.

Mindfulness practice helps too, which I haven't managed to acquire that habit.
I did practice a bit of the breathing exercise and I know how hard it is to focus our mind on perhaps the simplest thing -- breathing.
The system 1 keeps hinting, luring or coercing our minds into a wandering state, in which all kinds of thoughts are considered in a fleeting speed.
Failure to calm our busy minds down is a common cause to insomnia.
Worse, it keeps us from living in the present, even doing the most basic thing like breathing wholeheartedly becomes a challenge.

## Recognize true values

I've never thought too much about what my true values are, for which I'll have to come back later.

## Life in action

Life is a strenuous endeavor, and the best thing we can do is to make it a bit easier.
Liberating us from the rein of our dictator within is the first step, which can never be done too early.
Examining our thoughts from a fresh perspective gives us the freedom to make choices.
Uncovering our true selves removes the mental blinder that keeps us from having an open mind.
Accepting negative experiences peps up our life journey, and living in the present makes everything meaningful.
